---
layout: post
toc: true
title: "M5 - Forecasting - Part-III"
categories: portfolio
tags: [markdown, forecasting, html, EDA, Plotly, Time-Series]
---

# M5 - Forecasting - Part-III
<p>&nbsp;</p>
Now, I will try my hand at forecasting methods and predicting the demand for the three states and three products seperately.
<p>&nbsp;</p>

* As said earlier, this data has 42,000-time-series to forecast. I couldn't do that with my limited computing capabilities.
* So I started from the top. One time series for whole data appears to be to start the work with. But with more than a 60 million rows, the computer crashed due to low memory.
* Then, I thought of exploring all states combined in each product category. Again my ram crashed.
* So, instead of going one by one, I started thinking, what and how would a company look at the forecast.
* My hypothesis here is, there will be various levels where the necessary forecast data is looked upon
  * For example, people in HQ will look at overall states and products combines and also separately.
  * At regional HQ, concerned employees will look at the single state data, all three products forecast data, and also each store data so that they can distribute the necessary product.
  * Coming to store, the store managers will be looking at item level weekly, monthly, yearly.
  * So, with this thought process and my limited computing ability, I decided to forecast on 3 states and 3 product data. I considered each state and each product combination, collected their demand/sale on each day.
* Hence, I decide to forecast each day total demand/sale of overall items of each product category in each state i.e. forecast of Texas and food products, Texas and hobbies products etc.
* This gave me a 9-time-series forecasting prediction problem statements and luckily my computer managed to work with enough RAM to spare.

<p>&nbsp;</p>
## METHOD
---
As I studied various forecasting methods through my supply chain course, I explored methods like Naïve approach, Moving average, Exponential Smoothing and ARIMA, etc. 
<p>&nbsp;</p>
A Brief Introduction to above mentioned methods.
 * **NAIVE APPROACH:** It simply forecasts the next day's sales as the current day's sales.
 * **MOVING AVERAGE:** Here I calculate the mean sale over the previous 30 days and forecast them as the next day's sale.
 * **EXPONENTIAL SMOOTHING:** Exponential smoothing uses a weighted average, whereas the time moves back, the weight decay for that respective period. The previous time steps are exponentially weighted and added up to generate the forecast. This method is heavily depended on trend and seasonality in the data.
 * **ARIMA [Auto Regressive Integrated Moving Average]:** While exponential smoothing models are based on a description of trend and seasonality in data, ARIMA models aim to describe the correlations in the time series.


