---
layout: post
toc: true
title: "M5 - Forecasting - Part-II"
categories: portfolio
tags: [markdown, forecasting, html, EDA, Plotly]
---

# M5 - Forecasting - Part-II

* After having started with initial exploration, let's go a bit deeper. The main variables in this whole dataset have been unit sales(demand), price, items_ids,etc. 
<p>&nbsp;</p>

## EDA

<p>&nbsp;</p>
### EXPLORING PRODUCTS AND PRICES OF CATEGORIES

#### Exploring the number of products in category
{% include total_product_available_state.html %}
The above graph pretty much explains the insights. Number of products in each category products in across all the states. So we have access to symmetrical data for the three states.
<p>&nbsp;</p>

#### Mean Prices across departments
{% include mean_prices_across_products.html %}
Here we explore the mean prices of all products across the three different states. As seen earlier the hobbies products have been sold less, and we can see one of the reason here being the prices on the higher side. One interesting observation is that the mean prices of the all products combined appeared to be same across the three state. Geographical distance didn't affect the price range of products.
<p>&nbsp;</p>

#### Product Sales across the three states
 {% include product_sales__state.html %}
 This visual gives me more clear insights into what kind of products are being sold highest and in which states. Seems to be FOODS_3 are highest selling and HOBBIES_2 are lowest selling. A deep look in the characterization of the products will give us even more insights. As for this data we have only item_ids with numbers. Hence we are not concerned with that for now. 
<p>&nbsp;</p>

#### Category - Department - products sales across the state

{% include total_product_sales_across_state.html %}

FOODS_3 department products are sold more than 50% in CA than that of other the two states. Even Household_1 and Household_2 products appeared to be sold more than 50% in CA compared to TX & WI. All products in CA are sold more compared to TX & WI.

<p>&nbsp;</p>


#### UNIT SALES OF EACH CATEGORIES IN EACH STORE
{% include units_sales_product_across_stores.html %}

<p>&nbsp;</p>

#### TOTAL PRODUCT SALES IN EACH STATE
{% include unit_sales_each_state.html %}

<p>&nbsp;</p>

#### PRODUCT SALES IN ALL STATES
{% include unit_sales_each_products_all_states.html %}

<p>&nbsp;</p>

#### UNIT SALES IN EACH STATES
{% include unit_sales_each_products_each_state.html %}

<p>&nbsp;</p>

#### UNIT SALES EACH PRODUCTS MONTHLY
{% include unit_sales_each_products_each_state_monthly.html %}

<p>&nbsp;</p>
